Custom Filter implementation (#4969)
wso2/docs-apim: en/docs/deploy-and-publish/deploy-on-gateway/choreo-connect/extensions/custom-filters.md

# Add Custom Filters
Filters is a set of execution points in the request flow that intercept the request before it goes to the 
backend service. They are engaged while the request is processed within the enforcer. The defined set of filters 

> are applied to all the APIs deployed in the Choreo-Connect. And these filters are engaged inline and if the request 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are applied to all the APIs deployed in the Choreo-Connect. These filters are engaged inline and if the request 
```

fails at a certain filter, the request will not be forwarded to the next filter and the backend. 
The inbuilt set of filters are the authentication filter and the throttling filter.

> Custom filters can be added to the existing filters within enforcer, and they can be positioned as the end user wish.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Custom filters can be added to the existing filters within the enforcer, and they can be positioned as the end user wish.
```

> These filters would be engaged for all the APIs deployed within Choreo-Connect. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These filters are engaged for all the APIs deployed within Choreo-Connect. 
```

> Choreo-Connect provides a java interface to implement custom filters. Then the developer needs to compile the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Choreo-Connect provides a Java interface to implement custom filters. Then the developer needs to compile the 
```

> filter implementation as a jar file and mount it to the `/home/wso2/lib/dropins` directory within enforcer. When

Reviewer: ```suggestion
filter implementation as a JAR file and mount it to the `/home/wso2/lib/dropins` directory within the enforcer. When
```

> the enforcer starts, the jar files in that directory would be added to the classpath. Using Java Service Provider

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the enforcer starts, the JAR files in that directory are added to the classpath. Using Java Service Provider
```

> Interface, the classloading happens in enforcer. Further details on how to implement, can be found below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Interface, the classloading happens in the enforcer. Further details on how to implement this can be found below.
```

 
## How to add a custom filter

> 1. Create a java project with `org.wso2.choreo.connect.enforcer.commons` dependency. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a Java project with `org.wso2.choreo.connect.enforcer.commons` dependency. 
```

>    - For maven,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - For Apache Maven, use the following.
```

   ```xml
   <dependency>
       <groupId>org.wso2.am.choreo.connect</groupId>
       <artifactId>org.wso2.choreo.connect.enforcer.commons</artifactId>
       <version>1.0.0</version>
   </dependency>
   ```

> 2. Use the following interface to implement custom filter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Use the following interface to implement the custom filter.
```

    
        boolean handleRequest(RequestContext requestContext);
    }
    ```

    Here is the sample filter implementation which reads the property called `CustomProperty` from Filter 
    Configuration and add it as a header to the request.

    ```java
    package org.example.tests;
    
    import org.wso2.choreo.connect.enforcer.commons.model.APIConfig;
    import org.wso2.choreo.connect.enforcer.commons.model.RequestContext;
    import org.wso2.choreo.connect.enforcer.commons.Filter;
    
    import java.util.Map;
    
    public class CustomFilter implements Filter {
        private static final Logger log = LoggerFactory.getLogger(CustomFilter.class);
        private Map<String, String> configProperties;
    
        @Override
        public void init(APIConfig apiConfig, Map<String, String> configProperties) {
            this.configProperties = configProperties;
        }
    
        @Override
        public boolean handleRequest(RequestContext requestContext) {
            String headerValue = configProperties.get("CustomProperty");
            requestContext.addOrModifyHeaders("Custom-header-1", headerValue);
            return true;
        }
    }
    ```

> 3. Since we use JAVA SPI (Service Provider Interface), We need to provide the provider configuration file 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Since we use Java SPI (Service Provider Interface), we need to provide the provider configuration file 
```

> `META-INF/services/org.wso2.choreo.connect.enforcer.commons.Filter`. If you are using maven, create the file this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`META-INF/services/org.wso2.choreo.connect.enforcer.commons.Filter`. If you are using Apache Maven, create the file
```

file inside the <Project>/src/main/resources directory. The content of the file needs to be the qualified class name
of the filter implementation.

    ```
    org.example.tests.CustomFilter
    ```

> 4. Build the project and create the jar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Build the project and create the .jar file.
```

> 5. Edit the enforcer related configuration within config.toml file to include the custom filter. The classname needs to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Edit the enforcer related configuration within the config.toml file to include the custom filter. The classname needs to
```

be the fully qualified className. The position denotes the final filter position in the chain, when all the filters 

> are added. By default, the first position is taken by Authentication Filter and the Thorttle Filter is placed as the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are added. By default, the first position is taken by the Authentication Filter and the Thorttle Filter is placed as the 
```

> second filter. As the below example configuration contains `1` as the Position, it would be executed prior to 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
second filter. As the below example configuration contains `1` as the `position`, it would be executed prior to 
```
The position value is 3 in the sample provided, not 1. Am I missing something here?

the Authentication Filter.

    ```toml
    [[enforcer.filters]]
        # ClassName of the filter
        className = "org.example.tests.CustomFilter"
        # Position of the filter within final filter-chain
        position = 3
        # Custom Configurations
        [enforcer.filters.configProperties]
            CustomProperty = "foo"
    ```

> 6. The mount the jar file containing Custom Filter to the `/home/wso2/lib/dropins`. (If you are using docker-compose 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Mount the JAR file containing the Custom Filter to the `/home/wso2/lib/dropins`. (If you are using the docker-compose 
```

> file within the distribution, then add the jar file to 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
file within the distribution, then add the JAR file to 
```

`docker-compose/resources/enforcer/dropins` directory.)

> 7. Deploy the choreo-connect distribution and the filter would be engaged in Runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Deploy the choreo-connect distribution and the filter would be engaged during runtime.
```

# Add Custom Filters
Filters is a set of execution points in the request flow that intercept the request before it goes to the 
backend service. They are engaged while the request is processed within the enforcer. The defined set of filters 

> are applied to all the APIs deployed in the Choreo-Connect. These filters are engaged inline and if the request

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are applied to all the APIs deployed in Choreo Connect. These filters are engaged inline and if the request
```

fails at a certain filter, the request will not be forwarded to the next filter and the backend. 
The inbuilt set of filters are the authentication filter and the throttling filter.

Custom filters can be added to the existing filters within the enforcer, and they can be positioned based on the end user's preference.

> These filters are engaged for all the APIs deployed within Choreo-Connect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These filters are engaged for all the APIs deployed within Choreo Connect.
```

> Choreo-Connect provides a Java interface to implement custom filters. Then the developer needs to compile the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Choreo Connect provides a Java interface to implement custom filters. Then the developer needs to compile the
```

> Choreo-Connect provides a Java interface to implement custom filters. Then the developer needs to compile the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Choreo Connect provides a Java interface to implement custom filters. Then the developer needs to compile the
```

 
## How to add a custom filter

1. Create a Java project with `org.wso2.choreo.connect.enforcer.commons` dependency.
   - For Apache Maven, use the following.
   ```xml
   <dependency>
       <groupId>org.wso2.am.choreo.connect</groupId>
       <artifactId>org.wso2.choreo.connect.enforcer.commons</artifactId>
       <version>1.0.0</version>
   </dependency>
   ```

2. Use the following interface to implement the custom filter.

    ```java
    package org.wso2.choreo.connect.enforcer.commons;
    
    import org.wso2.choreo.connect.enforcer.commons.model.APIConfig;
    import org.wso2.choreo.connect.enforcer.commons.model.RequestContext;
    
    import java.util.Map;
    
    /**
        * Filters are the request interceptors that applies API Management capabilities at the gateway layer. This is the
        * Interface to implement chain of filters at the gateway.
        */
    public interface Filter {
    
        default void init(APIConfig apiConfig, Map<String, String> configProperties){};
    
        boolean handleRequest(RequestContext requestContext);
    }
    ```

>     Here is the sample filter implementation which reads the property called `CustomProperty` from Filter 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Here is the sample filter implementation that reads the property called `CustomProperty` from Filter 
```

>     Configuration and add it as a header to the request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Configuration and adds it as a header to the request.
```

    ```java
    package org.example.tests;
    
    import org.wso2.choreo.connect.enforcer.commons.model.APIConfig;
    import org.wso2.choreo.connect.enforcer.commons.model.RequestContext;
    import org.wso2.choreo.connect.enforcer.commons.Filter;
    
    import java.util.Map;
    
    public class CustomFilter implements Filter {
        private static final Logger log = LoggerFactory.getLogger(CustomFilter.class);
        private Map<String, String> configProperties;
    
        @Override
        public void init(APIConfig apiConfig, Map<String, String> configProperties) {
            this.configProperties = configProperties;
        }
    
        @Override
        public boolean handleRequest(RequestContext requestContext) {
            String headerValue = configProperties.get("CustomProperty");
            requestContext.addOrModifyHeaders("Custom-header-1", headerValue);
            return true;
        }
    }
    ```

3. Since we use Java SPI (Service Provider Interface), we need to provide the provider configuration file
`META-INF/services/org.wso2.choreo.connect.enforcer.commons.Filter`. If you are using Apache Maven, create the

> file inside the <Project>/src/main/resources directory. The content of the file needs to be the qualified class name

Reviewer: ```suggestion
file inside the `<PROJECT>/src/main/resources` directory. The content of the file needs to be the qualified class name
```

of the filter implementation.

    ```
    org.example.tests.CustomFilter
    ```

> 4. Build the project and create the JAR file.

Reviewer: Let's add instructions on how to do this or point them to a page that has this information.

> 5. Edit the enforcer related configuration within the config.toml file to include the custom filter. The className needs to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Edit the enforcer related configuration within the config.toml file to include the custom filter. The `className` needs to
```

> be the fully qualified className. The position denotes the final filter position in the chain, when all the filters 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be the fully qualified `className`. The position denotes the final filter position in the chain, when all the filters 
```

are added. By default, the first position is taken by the Authentication Filter and the Thorttle Filter is placed as the
second filter. As the below example configuration contains `1` as the `position`, it would be executed prior to
the Authentication Filter.

    ```toml
    [[enforcer.filters]]
        # ClassName of the filter
        className = "org.example.tests.CustomFilter"
        # Position of the filter within final filter-chain
        position = 3
        # Custom Configurations
        [enforcer.filters.configProperties]
            CustomProperty = "foo"
    ```

6. Mount the JAR file containing the Custom Filter to the `/home/wso2/lib/dropins`. (If you are using the docker-compose file within the distribution, then add the JAR file to
`docker-compose/resources/enforcer/dropins` directory.)

> 7. Deploy the choreo-connect distribution and the filter would be engaged during runtime.

Reviewer: Let's add a link to a page that describes how to do this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Deploy the Choreo Connect distribution and the filter would be engaged during runtime.
```
